Nodes as a service

Running your own Ethereum node can be challenging, especially when getting started or while scaling fast. There are a number of services that run optimized node infrastructures for you, so you can focus on developing your application or product instead. We will explain how node services work, the pros and cons of using them, and list providers if you are interested in getting started.

Prerequisites

If you do not already have an understanding of what nodes and clients are, check out nodes and clients.

Stakers

Solo stakers must run their own infrastructure rather than relying on third-party providers. This means running an execution client coupled with a consensus client. Before The Merge, it was possible to run a consensus client only and use a centralized provider for execution data; this is no longer possible. A solo staker must run both clients.

There are services available to ease this process. The services described on this page are for non-staking nodes.

How do node services work?

Node service providers run distributed node clients behind the scenes for you, so you do not have to.

These services typically provide an API key that you can use to write to and read from the blockchain. They often include access to Ethereum testnets in addition to Mainnet.

Some services offer you your own dedicated node that they manage for you, while others use load balancers to distribute activity across nodes.

Almost all node services are extremely easy to integrate with, involving one-line changes in your code to swap out your self-hosted node or even switch between the services themselves.

Often, node services run a variety of node clients and node types, allowing you to access full and archive nodes in addition to client-specific methods in one API.

It is important to note that node services do not and should not store your private keys or information.

What are the benefits of using a node service?

The main benefit of using a node service is not having to spend engineering time maintaining and managing nodes yourself. This allows you to focus on building your product rather than worrying about infrastructure maintenance.

Running your own nodes can be very expensive, from storage and bandwidth to valuable engineering time. Things like spinning up more nodes when scaling, upgrading nodes to the latest versions, and ensuring state consistency can distract from building and spending resources on your desired web3 product.

What are the cons of using a node service?

By using a node service, you are centralizing the infrastructure aspect of your product. For this reason, projects that hold decentralization to the utmost importance might prefer self-hosting nodes rather than outsourcing to a third party.

Read more about the benefits of running your own node.

Summary

Node services provide an easier path to interacting with Ethereum, especially if you do not want to manage infrastructure yourself. They are useful for developers and teams who want to move quickly, but they come with trade-offs around decentralization and self-sovereignty.
