Blocks

Blocks are batches of transactions with a hash of the previous block in the chain. This links blocks together, in a chain, because hashes are cryptographically derived from the block data. This prevents fraud, because one change in any block in history would invalidate all the following blocks as all subsequent hashes would change and everyone running the blockchain would notice.

Prerequisites

Blocks are a very beginner-friendly topic. But to help you better understand this page, we recommend you first read Accounts, Transactions, and our introduction to Ethereum.

Why blocks?

To ensure that all participants on the Ethereum network maintain a synchronized state and agree on the precise history of transactions, we batch transactions into blocks. This means dozens, or hundreds, of transactions are committed, agreed on, and synchronized all at once.

By spacing out commits, we give all network participants enough time to come to consensus: even though transaction requests occur dozens of times per second, blocks are only created and committed on Ethereum once every twelve seconds.

How blocks work

To preserve the transaction history, blocks are strictly ordered. Every new block created contains a reference to its parent block, and transactions within blocks are strictly ordered as well. Except in rare cases, at any given time, all participants on the network are in agreement on the exact number and history of blocks, and are working to batch the current live transaction requests into the next block.

Once a block is put together by a randomly selected validator on the network, it is propagated to the rest of the network; all nodes add this block to the end of their blockchain, and a new validator is selected to create the next block. The exact block-assembly process and commitment and consensus process is currently specified by Ethereum’s proof-of-stake protocol.

Proof-of-stake protocol

Proof-of-stake means the following:

Validating nodes have to stake 32 ETH into a deposit contract as collateral against bad behavior. This helps protect the network because provably dishonest activity leads to some or all of that stake being destroyed.

In every slot, spaced twelve seconds apart, a validator is randomly selected to be the block proposer. They bundle transactions together, execute them and determine a new state. They wrap this information into a block and pass it around to other validators.

Other validators who hear about the new block re-execute the transactions to ensure they agree with the proposed change to the global state. Assuming the block is valid, they add it to their own database.

If a validator hears about two conflicting blocks for the same slot they use their fork-choice algorithm to pick the one supported by the most staked ETH.

More on proof-of-stake.

What's in a block?

There is a lot of information contained within a block. At the highest level a block contains the following fields:

Slot: the slot the block belongs to.

Proposer index: the ID of the validator proposing the block.

Parent root: the hash of the preceding block.

State root: the root hash of the state object.

Body: an object containing several fields, as defined below.

The block body contains several fields of its own:

RANDAO reveal: a value used to select the next block proposer.

Eth1 data: information about the deposit contract.

Graffiti: arbitrary data used to tag blocks.

Proposer slashings: list of validators to be slashed.

Attester slashings: list of attesters to be slashed.

Attestations: list of attestations made against previous slots.

Deposits: list of new deposits to the deposit contract.

Voluntary exits: list of validators exiting the network.

Sync aggregate: subset of validators used to serve light clients.

Execution payload: transactions passed from the execution client.

The attestations field contains a list of all the attestations in the block. Attestations have their own data type that contains several pieces of data. Each attestation contains:

Aggregation bits: a list of which validators participated in this attestation.

Data: a container with multiple subfields.

Signature: aggregate signature of a set of validators against the data part.

The data field in the attestation contains the following:

Slot: the slot the attestation relates to.

Index: indices for attesting validators.

Beacon block root: the root hash of the Beacon block seen as the head of the chain.

Source: the last justified checkpoint.

Target: the latest epoch boundary block.

Executing the transactions in the execution payload updates the global state. All clients re-execute the transactions in the execution payload to ensure the new state matches that in the new block's state root field. This is how clients can tell that a new block is valid and safe to add to their blockchain. The execution payload itself is an object with several fields. There is also an execution payload header that contains important summary information about the execution data. These data structures are organized as follows:

The execution payload header contains the following fields:

Parent hash: hash of the parent block.

Fee recipient: account address for paying transaction fees to.

State root: root hash for the global state after applying changes in this block.

Receipts root: hash of the transaction receipts trie.

Logs bloom: data structure containing event logs.

Previous RANDAO: value used in random validator selection.

Block number: the number of the current block.

Gas limit: maximum gas allowed in this block.

Gas used: the actual amount of gas used in this block.

Timestamp: the block time.

Extra data: arbitrary additional data as raw bytes.

Base fee per gas: the base fee value.

Block hash: hash of execution block.

Transactions root: root hash of the transactions in the payload.

Withdrawal root: root hash of the withdrawals in the payload.

The execution payload itself contains the following, which is identical to the header except that instead of the root hash of the transactions it includes the actual list of transactions and withdrawal information:

Parent hash: hash of the parent block.

Fee recipient: account address for paying transaction fees to.

State root: root hash for the global state after applying changes in this block.

Receipts root: hash of the transaction receipts trie.

Logs bloom: data structure containing event logs.

Previous RANDAO: value used in random validator selection.

Block number: the number of the current block.

Gas limit: maximum gas allowed in this block.

Gas used: the actual amount of gas used in this block.

Timestamp: the block time.

Extra data: arbitrary additional data as raw bytes.

Base fee per gas: the base fee value.

Block hash: hash of execution block.

Transactions: list of transactions to be executed.

Withdrawals: list of withdrawal objects.

The withdrawals list contains withdrawal objects structured in the following way:

Address: account address that has withdrawn.

Amount: withdrawal amount.

Index: withdrawal index value.

Validator index: validator index value.

Block time

Block time refers to the time separating blocks. In Ethereum, time is divided up into twelve second units called slots. In each slot a single validator is selected to propose a block. Assuming all validators are online and fully functional there will be a block in every slot, meaning the block time is 12 seconds. However, occasionally validators might be offline when called to propose a block, meaning slots can sometimes go empty.

This implementation differs from proof-of-work based systems where block times are probabilistic and tuned by the protocol's target mining difficulty. Ethereum's average block time is a perfect example of this whereby the transition from proof-of-work to proof-of-stake can be clearly inferred based on the consistency of the new 12 second block time.

Block size

A final important note is that blocks themselves are bounded in size. Each block has a target size of 30 million gas but the size of blocks will increase or decrease in accordance with network demands, up until the block limit of 60 million gas, two times the target block size. The block gas limit can be adjusted upwards or downwards by a factor of 1/1024 from the previous block's gas limit. As a result, validators can change the block gas limit through consensus. The total amount of gas expended by all transactions in the block must be less than the block gas limit. This is important because it ensures that blocks can’t be arbitrarily large. If blocks could be arbitrarily large, then less performant full nodes would gradually stop being able to keep up with the network due to space and speed requirements. The larger the block, the greater the computing power required to process them in time for the next slot. This is a centralizing force, which is resisted by capping block sizes.
