Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM)

The Ethereum Virtual Machine, or EVM, is a decentralized virtual environment that executes code consistently and securely across all Ethereum nodes. Nodes run the EVM to execute smart contracts, using gas to measure the computational effort required for operations, ensuring efficient resource allocation and network security.

Prerequisites

Some basic familiarity with common terminology in computer science such as bytes, memory, and a stack is necessary to understand the EVM. It would also be helpful to be comfortable with cryptography and blockchain concepts like hash functions and the Merkle tree.

From ledger to state machine

The analogy of a distributed ledger is often used to describe blockchains like Bitcoin, which enable a decentralized currency using fundamental tools of cryptography. The ledger maintains a record of activity which must adhere to a set of rules that govern what someone can and cannot do to modify the ledger. For example, a Bitcoin address cannot spend more Bitcoin than it has previously received. These rules underpin all transactions on Bitcoin and many other blockchains.

While Ethereum has its own native cryptocurrency, ether, that follows almost exactly the same intuitive rules, it also enables a much more powerful function: smart contracts. For this more complex feature, a more sophisticated analogy is required. Instead of a distributed ledger, Ethereum is a distributed state machine. Ethereum's state is a large data structure which holds not only all accounts and balances, but a machine state, which can change from block to block according to a predefined set of rules, and which can execute arbitrary machine code. The specific rules of changing state from block to block are defined by the EVM.

The Ethereum state transition function

The EVM behaves like a mathematical function: given an input, it produces a deterministic output. It is therefore helpful to describe Ethereum as having a state transition function, where Y of S and T equals S prime. Given an old valid state S and a new set of valid transactions T, the Ethereum state transition function Y(S, T) produces a new valid output state S prime.

State

In the context of Ethereum, the state is an enormous data structure called a modified Merkle Patricia Trie, which keeps all accounts linked by hashes and reducible to a single root hash stored on the blockchain.

Transactions

Transactions are cryptographically signed instructions from accounts. There are two types of transactions: those which result in message calls and those which result in contract creation.

Contract creation results in the creation of a new contract account containing compiled smart contract bytecode. Whenever another account makes a message call to that contract, it executes its bytecode.

EVM instructions

The EVM executes as a stack machine with a depth of 1024 items. Each item is a 256-bit word, which was chosen for the ease of use with 256-bit cryptography such as Keccak-256 hashes or secp256k1 signatures.

During execution, the EVM maintains a transient memory, as a word-addressed byte array, which does not persist between transactions.

Transient storage

Transient storage is a per-transaction key-value store accessed through the TSTORE and TLOAD opcodes. It persists across all internal calls during the same transaction but is cleared at the end of the transaction. Unlike memory, transient storage is modeled as part of the EVM state rather than the execution frame, yet it is not committed to the global state. Transient storage enables gas-efficient temporary state sharing across internal calls during a transaction.

Storage

Contracts contain a Merkle Patricia storage trie as a word-addressable word array associated with the account in question and part of the global state. This persistent storage differs from transient storage, which is available only for the duration of a single transaction and does not form part of the account's persistent storage trie.

Opcodes

Compiled smart contract bytecode executes as a number of EVM opcodes, which perform standard stack operations like XOR, AND, ADD, SUB, and so on. The EVM also implements a number of blockchain-specific stack operations, such as ADDRESS, BALANCE, and BLOCKHASH. The opcode set also includes TSTORE and TLOAD, which provide access to transient storage.

EVM implementations

All implementations of the EVM must adhere to the specification described in the Ethereum Yellowpaper.

Over Ethereum's ten year history, the EVM has undergone several revisions, and there are several implementations of the EVM in various programming languages.

Ethereum execution clients include an EVM implementation. Additionally, there are multiple standalone implementations, including Py-EVM in Python, evmone in C++, ethereumjs-vm in JavaScript, and revm in Rust.
